how a battery works


this letter may be omitted on the first reading

my dear boy

when i was a boy we used to make our own batteries for our experiments
that was before storage batteries became as widely used as they are
today when everybody has one in the starting system of his automobile
that was also before the day of the small dry battery such as we use in
pocket flash lights the batteries which we made were like those which
they used on telegraph systems and were sometimes called gravity
batteries of course we tried several kinds and i believe i got quite a
little acid around the house at one time or another ill tell you about
only one kind but i shall use the words electron proton nucleus
atom and molecule about some of which nothing was known when i was
a boy

we used a straightsided glass jar which would hold about a gallon on
the bottom we set a star shaped arrangement made of sheets of copper
with a long wire soldered to it so as to reach up out of the jar then
we poured in a solution of copper sulphate until the jar was about half
full this solution was made by dissolving in water crystals of blue
vitriol which we bought at the drug store

blue vitriol or copper sulphate as the chemists would call it is a
substance which forms glassy blue crystals its molecules are formed of
copper atoms sulphur atoms and oxygen atoms in each molecule of it
there is one atom of copper one of sulphur and four of oxygen

when it dissolves in water the molecules of the blue vitriol go
wandering out into the spaces between the water molecules but that
isnt all that happens or the most important thing for one who is
interested in making a battery

each molecule is formed by six atoms that is by six little groups of
electrons playing about six little nuclei about each nucleus there is
going on a game but some of the electrons are playing in the game about
their own nucleus and at the same time taking some part in the game
which is going on around one of the other nuclei thats why the groups
or atoms stay together as a molecule when the molecules wander out into
the spaces between the water molecules something happens to this
complicated game

it will be easiest to see what sort of thing happens if we talk about a
molecule of ordinary table salt for that has only two atoms in it one
atom is sodium and one is chlorine the sodium molecule has eleven
electrons playing around its nucleus fairly close to the nucleus there
are two electrons then farther away there are eight more and these are
having a perfect game then still farther away from the nucleus there is
a single lonely electron

the atom of chlorine has seventeen electrons which play about its
nucleus close to the nucleus there are two a little farther away there
are eight just as there are in the sodium atom then still farther away
there are seven

i am going to draw a picture fig  to show what i mean but you must
remember that these electrons are not all in the same plane as if they
lay on a sheet of paper but are scattered all around just as they would
be if they were specks on a ball

illustration fig 

you see that the sodium atom has one lonely electron which hasnt any
play fellows and that the chlorine atom has seven in its outside circle
it appears that eight would make a much better game suppose that extra
electron in the sodium atom goes over and plays with those in the
chlorine atom so as to make eight in the outside group as i have shown
fig  that will be all right as long as it doesnt get out of sight of
its own nucleus because you remember that the sodium nucleus is
responsible for eleven electrons the lonely electron of the sodium atom
neednt be lonely any more if it can persuade its nucleus to stay so
close to the chlorine atom that it can play in the outer circle of the
chlorine atom

illustration fig 

the outer circle of the chlorine atom will then have a better game for
it will have just the eight that makes a perfect game this can happen
if the chlorine atom will stay close enough to the sodium atom so that
the outermost electron of the sodium atom can play in the chlorine
circle you see everything will be satisfactory if an electron can be
shared by the two atoms that can happen only if the two atoms stay
together that is if they form a molecule thats why there are
molecules and thats what i meant when i spoke of the molecule as a big
game played by the electrons of two or more atoms

this molecule which is formed by a sodium atom and a chlorine atom is
called a molecule of sodium chloride by chemists and a molecule of salt
by most every one who eats it something strange happens when it
dissolves it wanders around between the water molecules and for some
reason or otherwe dont know exactly whyit decides to split up again
into sodium and chlorine but it cant quite do it the electron which
joined the game about the chlorine nucleus wont leave it the result is
that the nucleus of the sodium atom gets away but it leaves this one
electron behind

what gets away isnt a sodium atom for it has one too few electrons and
what remains behind isnt a chlorine atom for it has one too many
electrons we call these new groups ions from a greek word which means
to go for they do go wandering off into the spaces between the water
molecules fig  gives you an idea of what happens

you remember that in an atom there are always just as many protons as
electrons in this sodium ion which is formed when the nucleus of the
sodium atom breaks away but leaves behind one planetary electron there
is then one more proton than there are electrons because it has an
extra proton which hasnt any electron to associate with we call it a
plus ion or a positive ion similarly we call the chlorine ion which
has one less proton than it has electrons a minus or negative ion

illustration fig 

now despite the fact that these ions broke away from each other they
arent really satisfied any time that the sodium ion can find an
electron to take the place of the one it lost it will welcome it that
is the sodium ion will want to go toward places where there are extra
electrons in the same way the chlorine ion will go toward places where
electrons are wanted as if it could satisfy its guilty conscience by
giving up the electron which it stole from the sodium atom or at least
by giving away some other electron for they are all alike anyway

sometimes a positive sodium ion and a negative chlorine ion meet in
their wanderings in the solution and both get satisfied by forming a
molecule again even so they dont stay together long before they split
apart and start wandering again thats what goes on over and over
again millions of times when you dissolve a little salt in a glass of
water

now we can see what happens when copper sulphate dissolves the copper
atom has twentynine electrons about its nucleus and all except two of
these are nicely grouped for playing their games about the nucleus two
of the electrons are rather out of the game and are unsatisfied they
play with the electrons of the part of the molecule which is called
sulphate that is the part formed by the sulphur atom and the four
oxygen atoms these five atoms of the sulphate part stay together very
well and so we treat them as a group

the sulphate group and the copper atom stay together as long as they are
not in solution but when they are they act very much like the sodium
and chlorine which i just described the molecule splits up into two
ions one positive and one negative the positive ion is the copper part
except that two of the electrons which really belong to a copper atom
got left behind because the sulphate part wouldnt give them up the
rest of the molecule is the negative ion

the copper ion is a copper atom which has lost two electrons the
sulphate ion is a combination of one sulphur atom four oxygen atoms and
two electrons which it stole from the copper atom just as the sodium
ion is unsatisfied because in it there is one more proton than there are
electrons so the copper ion is unsatisfied as a matter of fact it is
twice as badly unsatisfied it has two more protons than it has
electrons we say it has twice the electrical charge of the sodium
ion

just like a sodium ion the copper ion will tend to go toward any place
where there are extra electrons which it can get to satisfy its own
needs in much the same way the sulphate ion will go toward places where
it can give up its two extra electrons sometimes of course as ions of
these two kinds wander about between the water molecules they meet and
satisfy each other by forming a molecule of copper sulphate but if they
do they will split apart later on that is they will dissociate as we
should say

now lets go on with the kind of batteries i used to make as a boy you
can see that in the solution of copper sulphate at the bottom of the jar
there was always present a lot of positive copper ions and of negative
sulphate ions

on top of this solution of copper sulphate i poured very carefully a
weak solution of sulphuric acid as i told you an acid always has
hydrogen in its molecules sulphuric acid has molecules formed by two
hydrogen atoms and one of the groups which we decided to call sulphate
a better name for this acid would be hydrogen sulphate for that would
imply that its molecule is the same as one of copper sulphate except
that the place of the copper is taken by two atoms of hydrogen it takes
two atoms of hydrogen because the copper atom has two lonely electrons
while a hydrogen atom only has one it takes two electrons to fill up
the game which the electrons of the sulphate group are playing if it
can get these from a single atom all right but if it has to get one
from each of two atoms it will do it that way

i remember when i mixed the sulphuric acid with water that i learned to
pour the acid into the water and not the other way around spatterings
of sulphuric acid are not good for hands or clothes with this solution
i filled the jar almost to the top and then hung over the edge a sort of
a crows foot shape of cast zinc the zinc reached down into the
sulphuric acid solution there was a binding post on it to which a wire
could be connected this wire and the one which came from the plate of
copper at the bottom were the two terminals of the battery we called
the wire from the copper positive and the one from the zinc
negative

now we shall see why and how the battery worked the molecules of
sulphuric acid dissociate in solution just as do those of copper
sulphate when sulphuric acid molecules split the sulphate part goes
away with two electrons which dont belong to it and each of the
hydrogen atoms goes away by itself but without its electron we call
each a hydrogen ion but you can see that each is a single proton

in the two solutions are pieces of zinc and copper zinc is like all the
rest of the metals in one way atoms of metals always have lonely
electrons for which there doesnt seem to be room in the game which is
going on around their nuclei copper as we saw has two lonely electrons
in each atom zinc also has two some metals have one and some two and
some even more lonely electrons in each atom

what happens then is this the sulphate ions wandering around in the
weak solution of sulphuric acid come along beside the zinc plate and
beckon to its atoms the sulphate ions had a great deal rather play the
game called zinc sulphate than the game called hydrogen sulphate so
the zinc atoms leave their places to join with the sulphate ions but
wait a minute the sulphate ions have two extra electrons which they
kept from the hydrogen atoms they dont need the two lonely electrons
which each zinc atom could bring and so the zinc atom leaves behind it
these unnecessary electrons

every time a zinc atom leaves the plate it fails to take all its
electrons with it what leaves the zinc plate therefore to go into
solution is really not a zinc atom but is a zinc ion that is it is the
nucleus of a zinc atom and all except two of the planetary electrons

every time a zinc ion leaves the plate there are left behind two
electrons the plate doesnt want them for all the rest of its atoms
have just the same number of protons as of electrons where are they to
go we shall see in a minute

sometimes the zinc ions which have got into solution meet with sulphate
ions and form zinc sulphate molecules but if they do these molecules
split up sooner or later into ions again in the upper part of the
liquid in the jar therefore there are sulphate ions which are negative
and two kinds of positive ions namely the hydrogen ions and the zinc
ions

before the zinc ions began to crowd in there were just enough hydrogen
ions to go with the sulphate ions as it is the entrance of the zinc
ions has increased the number of positive ions and now there are too
many some of the positive ions therefore and particularly the
hydrogen ions because the sulphate prefers to associate with the zinc
ions cant find enough playfellows and so go down in the jar

down in the bottom of the jar the hydrogen ions find more sulphate ions
to play with but that leaves the copper ions which used to play with
these sulphate ions without any playmates so the copper ions go still
further down and join with the copper atoms of the copper plate they
havent much right to do so for you remember that they havent their
proper number of electrons each copper ion lacks two electrons of being
a copper atom nevertheless they join the copper plate the result is a
plate of copper which has too few electrons it needs two electrons for
every copper ion which joins it

how about the zinc plate you remember that it has two electrons more
than it needs for every zinc ion which has left it if only the extra
electrons on the negative zinc plate could get around to the positive
copper plate they can if we connect a wire from one plate to the other
then the electrons from the zinc stream into the spaces between the
atoms of the wire and push ahead of them the electrons which are
wandering around in these spaces at the other end an equal number of
electrons leave the wire to satisfy the positive copper plate so we
have a stream of electrons in the wire that is a current of
electricity and our battery is working

thats the sort of a battery i used to play with if you understand it
you can get the general idea of all batteries let me express it in
general terms

at the negative plate of a battery ions go into solution and electrons
are left behind at the other end of the battery positive ions are
crowded out of solution and join the plate where they cause a scarcity
of electrons that is make the plate positive if a wire is connected
between the two plates electrons will stream through it from the
negative plate to the positive and this stream is a current of
electricity

illustration pl iiidry battery for use in audion circuits
courtesy of national carbon co inc storage battery courtesy of
the electric storage battery co



